# Broadhust_and_Gregory_et_al_2021

These are the scripts used to run the analyses and generate figures for the following publication: Broadhurst H.A., Gregory L.M., Bleakley E.K., Perkins J.C., Lavin J.V., Bolton P., Browett S.S., Howe C.V., Singleton N., Tansley D., Sales N.G. & McDevitt A.D. Mapping differences in mammalian distributions and diversity using environmental DNA from rivers. (2021).

Abstract: Aim Finding more efficient ways to monitor, and estimate the diversity of, mammalian communities is a major step towards their management and conservation. Environmental DNA (eDNA) from river water has recently been shown to be a viable method for biomonitoring mammalian communities. Yet, most of the studies to date have focused on the potential for eDNA to detect individual species, with little focus on describing patterns of community diversity and structure. In this study, we focus on the sampling effort required to reliably map the diversity and distribution of semi-aquatic and terrestrial mammals and allow inferences of community structure surrounding rivers. Location Southeastern England Methods We used eDNA metabarcoding on water samples collected along two rivers and a beaver enclosure over two days, targeting terrestrial and semi-aquatic mammals. Mammalian community diversity and composition was assessed based on species richness and β-diversity. Differences between river communities were calculated and partitioned into nestedness and turnover, and the sampling effort required to rapidly detect semi-aquatic and terrestrial species was evaluated based on species accumulation curves and occupancy modelling. Results eDNA metabarcoding efficiently detected 25 wild mammal species from five orders in two days of sampling, representing the vast majority (82%) of the species expected in the area. The required sampling effort varied between orders, with common species (generally rodents, deer and lagomorph species) more readily detected, with carnivores detected less frequently. Measures of species richness differed between rivers (both overall and within each mammalian order) and patterns of β-diversity revealed the importance of species replacement in sites within each river, against a pattern of species loss between the two rivers. Main conclusions eDNA metabarcoding demonstrated its capability to rapidly detect mammal species, allowing inferences of community composition that will better inform future sampling strategies for this Class. Importantly, this study highlights the potential use of eDNA data for investigating mammalian community dynamics over different spatial scales.

Raw sequence data and  tab separated files used to demultiplex samples in library 1 and 2 during obitools pipeline (ngsfilter_EWT_1.tsv; ngsfilter_EWT_2.tsv) will be available on DRYAD digital repository

Raw sequences were generated on an Illumina MiSeq, V2 300 cycle kit. Samples are multiplexed with MID tags on the primers. See full details on library prep in manuscript.

Each step from processing FASTQ files to full analyses are included here. The other files are: Sample_Sheet.csv: This file contains details of each replicate. Site_data.csv: This file contains details of each sample site. Raw_Sequences_To_MOTU_Table.txt: Obitools bioinformatics pipeline. EWT1_d3_MOTUs.csv: Raw MOTUs file following Obitools bioinformatics pipeline for library 1. EWT2_d3_MOTUs.CSV: Raw MOTU’s file following Obitools bioinformatics pipeline. Tag_Switching_and_Filtering.txt: R script used to account for tag-switching and conservative filtering to remove putative contaminants.
Folder: Library_1_Filtering: Output files after each filtering step for library 1. EWT1_PC_Corrected.csv: Output file after accounting for tag switching and removing the positive control. EWT1_Blanks_Corrected.csv: Output file after accounting for contamination with the negative controls. EWT1_Mammal_MOTUs.csv: Output file after removing non-mammal MOTUs. EWT1_Human_Corrected.csv: Output file after removing human reads/MOTUs. EWT1_Wild_Mammals.csv: Output file after removing domestic mammal species. EWT1_Final.csv: The filtered dataset for library 1 and the MOTUs identified at species level.
Folder: Library_2_Filtering: Output files after each filtering step for Library 2. EWT2_PC_Corrected.csv: Output file after accounting for tag switching and removing the positive control. EWT2_Blanks_Corrected.csv: Output file after accounting for contamination with the negative controls. EWT2_Mammal_MOTUs.csv: Output file after removing non-mammal MOTUs. EWT2_Human_Corrected.csv: Output file after removing human reads/MOTUs. EWT2_Wild_Mammals.csv: The filtered dataset for library 2 and the MOTUs identified at species level.
Create_Input_Files.txt: Explains how the input files for analysis were created. ewt1_sites.csv: Total number of reads for each species for each sample site, library 1. Ewt_sites.csv: Total number of reads for each species for each sample site, library 2. EWT_Data_Analysis.R: Script for analysis used. Occupancy_detecion.csv: Input file for occupancy analysis.
